so there's massive black hole we've ever
found is in a quasar galaxy called tio
n61 8 and they found it by looking at
how fast the hydrogen gas is spiraling
around that black hole if you know how
fast the gas is spiraling then you know
how big the thing is that it's spiraling
around just by the rules of gravity and
this gas was moving at 7,000 kilometers
per second which means that the black
hole that it was spiraling around is 66
billion times the mass of the Sun
compare that to the black hole in the
center of the Milky Way which is like 4
million times the mass of the Sun so
that is piddly in comparison how teeny
tiny but is there anything to actually
physically stop a black hole from
growing any bigger like is there a
physical limit at which point it could
no longer grow any further so to answer
that question we're gonna have to
understand how black holes grow and
that's the process that we call
accretion essentially collect material
under gravity and it's something that we
see happening across all areas of
astrophysics things like binary stars
and x-ray binaries white dwarfs neutron
stars things like that and essentially
what happens is that in falling material
onto a black hole gets spread out into a
disc and that's because it has something
we call angular momentum or rotational
energy so in a sense what's happened is
the materials come in with some
rotational energy and so it's flattened
out and form a disc the same way that
when you you know throw a ball a pizza
dough above your head it flattens out
into a disc cause you've set it spinning
I'm like and what happened is that the
material in that disc has a lot of
energy because it's moving very fast
because it's the thing that it's moving
around is so massive and so it has
enough energy to stay on very well
ordered orbits and just continually
orbit the black hole rather than
actually losing energy and falling
beyond the event horizon of the black
hole ie that point of no return when
nothing else can escape so the reason
the black hole then actually accretes
that material and it doesn't just
permanently stay in that disc is because
energy is actually radiated
a through collisions between particles
that exchange momentum and then also
because you end up generating lots of
friction ie heat and so you end up with
a lot of radiation coming off of that
accretion disk as well and what we call
a blackbody spectrum so depending on the
accretion disk
temperature you get a different shape of
the spectrum out and you can end up
getting higher and higher energy
radiation up to like x-rays and gamma
rays as well and that's one of the
reasons that we actually know that these
accreting supermassive black holes are
there because of the huge amounts of
high-energy radiation coming from the
center of galaxies where they're found
but actually it's this radiation that's
going to cause a lot of issues in the
question of how big black holes grow
because if you have that radiation
constantly pushing outwards away from
the black hole then that's actually
gonna form what we call a pressure a
radiation pressure your photons are
particles that actually have momentum so
that if they hit into other things
around the black hole they're actually
gonna start pushing stuff outwards but
of course you've also got the gravity of
the black hole constantly pulling stuff
inwards as well so the maximum rate at
which a black hole could grow would be
when gravity pushing inwards is
perfectly balanced by the force of
radiation pushing outwards and this has
been known for over a hundred years
since Arthur Eddington figured this out
in 1916 I'll bet he used a lot of
simplifications you know Newton's laws
necessarily relativity and then also
some assumptions that we now know not to
be true around a black hole but it was a
nice simple math to say take the
equation that says this is the force and
gravity and take the equation that says
this is the force of your radiation and
here you get the maximum accretion rate
of the black hole and the main thing
that it's dependent on is the mass of
the black hole I the bigger the black
hole is the more mass you should be able
to recruit but the thing is black holes
don't spend their entire lives accreting
at that maximum level and that's because
a you know you don't always have that
amount of material available it's not
being inflow to the center of a galaxy
where the black hole is but then also
that it's depend
on the fact that your black hole is
spinning and so the spin can actually
affect how much matter it can accrete
but then also spinning black holes have
magnetic field lines which then get all
tangled as the black hole spins and that
actually funnels particles and energy
away from the accretion disk in these
big light year long Jets and then also
these sort of winds as well which can
actually sweep away material to clear
out the area around a black hole so by
setting up an accretion disk you can
also clear the area around a black hole
to add a load of energy to that
surrounding material it gets really hot
and until it's cooled down enough it
won't sink back towards the center and
reform that accretion disks the black
hole can start growing again kind of
like the black hole is shooting itself
in the foot effectively now you can also
merge two black holes together as well
which can double the mass of your black
hole and we know that happens for sort
of stellar-mass black holes like what my
gos detected out the gravitational waves
and we think that it happens in the
center of two galaxies merging together
because you've got two black holes in
the center that will eventually merge as
well I'm not really going to cover that
here but I do talk about it in my new
book that's coming out on September 5th
it's called space the ten things you
should know and I'll provide a link in
the description for you to preorder it
but essentially if you're thinking about
how black holes can grow by accreting
material then really all you're limited
by is time how long have you got to wait
for the black hole to accrete material
after doing its maximum rate for so many
years and the really cool thing is that
we can look at the population of
supermassive black holes around us in
the universe today and we know they've
only had fourteen billion years to grow
that big because that's how old the
universe is so we can then work out well
how efficient are these black holes on
average ie what percentage of that
maximum accretion rate are they actually
accreting at across the whole age of the
universe you find that it amperages out
around about ten percent or so you know
some are actually accreting at maximum
right now some well below that but over
time
about 10% so that made me think I've
been thinking that's dangerous
if you're only limited by time then
technically the biggest black hole you
could ever make would be the entirety of
all matter in the universe in a black
hole which is difficult to estimate but
we put it around about 10 to the 60
kilograms which is a 1 with 60 zeroes
after it
now this well it's very unlikely that
will happen so it's not like a doomsday
scenario at all
it's a doomsday device gosh because the
universe is expanding it's even actually
accelerating expanding so all matter is
actually moving away from everything
else so it's unlikely this will ever
happen but you know what I figured why
not work it out back of the envelope
calculation to say if a black hole is
gonna start at say 10 times the mass of
the Sun how long would it take at the
maximum rate that it could accrete to
reach 10 to the 60 kilograms and you
find out that it's about 70 billion
years which is shorter than the age of
the universe but obviously we know that
black holes don't increase at that
maximum accretion level because they
blow out all the material around them
just by setting up the accretion disk in
the first place so it's probably more
likely that it would be hundreds of
billions of years maybe even trillions
because it's kind of exponential how
fast you grow your black hole but still
cool calculation to do on a Friday
afternoon gotta say now Friday turns out
though my Ultra massive super duper
black hole which Webb decided I'm
calling it now from now on trademarked
is not actually physically possible for
another reason that's actually to do
with black hole accretion physics and
essentially it's all to do with the
radius at which you get materials so yes
you have the event horizon around the
black hole which is the point of no
return
but another radius around the black hole
you have is called the inner most stable
circular orbit or the Isco people often
refer it to and that's essentially the
last point at which you can have
something in a very stable orbit around
the black hole say
and material like an accretion disk or
stay in orbit of a star like what we've
observed around our black hole in the
center of the Milky Way and the thing is
that in a most stable circular orbit
gets pushed further and further out from
the black hole as the black hole gets
more and more massive and eventually it
will actually pass what we call the self
gravitational radius and what I mean by
self gravity is how much stuff around
the black hole is attracted to each
other compared to how much it's
attracted to the black hole so this is
why you don't have one huge accretion
disk around the black hole you actually
have galaxies composed of stars because
beyond the self gravitational radius the
gas is attracted to each other and it
collapses to form stars rather than just
everything eventually you're just
falling into the black hole so as your
black hole grows and grows your
innermost stable circular orbit as it
pushes outwards and outwards is
eventually going to pass that point at
which stuff is attracted to each other
or stuff is attracted to the black hole
and so at that point you can't form one
of these accretion disks if you've got
material coming in if it's on a direct
trajectory it's gonna go straight into
the black hole but if it's not on a
direct trajectory instead of being
pulled into that nice orbiting accretion
disk it's not gonna happen you're not
going to be able to have those
collisions and that sort of radiation of
heat outwards that allows all of that
material to be accreted by the black
hole and direct trajectories of material
is nowhere near the same amount as
actually being able to accrete at that
maximum level that accretion disk
allows you to do so because we know the
mass behind general relativity quite
well we can work out what that inner
most stable circular orbit will be for a
given mass of black hole and we can also
work out what that self gravitational
radius will be given the mass of the
black hole and that allows us to work
out the maximum mass at which a black
hole can grow - at which point those two
things cross over and it does depend on
your spin of your black hole again but
on average it works out to be about 50
billion times the mass of the Sun
pushing to higher spin gets you to the
66 billion times the mass of the Sun of
that black hole that's seen in the
quasar tio ends that
one eight and so what that means is that
because we're seeing black holes of that
mass in our current universe it means
that we're already pushing that limit
after fourteen billion years of the
universe's history at which point black
holes can't grow by accretion anymore
they can only grow by mergers and so
that growth of black holes is gonna slow
down but eventually what it means is
that quasars will win count quasars is
what we call these actively growing
supermassive black holes that are giving
off all this radiation in the radio and
infrared in the x-rays in the center of
these galaxies that appear as these huge
bright point sources so that we know
that they're there eventually they're
all gonna wink out and all these quasars
will go dark and will no longer be able
to see that process of a black hole
accreting material so that image from
the event horizon telescope of the light
from the accretion disk around the
supermassive black hole in Messier 87
came at a really fortuitous time because
it meant the black hole had grown big
enough so that we could actually resolve
the shadow of the event horizon on the
accretion disk using the telescopes that
we currently have on earth but also that
it hadn't grown so big as to already
have cut off that accretion process so
that hadn't already winked out of
existence then you're never going to be
able to form that accretion disk of
material around you little burp ebert
there what here like the word Isco could
be used as like a drama basement yes
it's it looks like disco
I wonder if discos to his brother was
gold it's goes to achieving my goal
mattered so ha oh oh hey favor one good
meal boom one emesis at the minute is
grass Oh
you